Because a bug can cause people to die and enterprises to go bankrupt,
formal methods, and in particular formal proofs, are crucial for the
European economy, and for the development of a safe, secure, and
ethical information society, in the European Union.  It is also
essential to strengthen the citizens' confidence in science and
technology. Mastering the technology of formal proofs and its
evolution is therefore vital for Europe, if we want to remain
competitive in this domain.

Formal proofs are developed using research infrastructures called
"proof systems" that enable us to build and study formal proofs, just
like particle accelerators allow us to build and study particles. But
the development of formal methods, in research, industry, and
education, is slowed down by the lack of integration of these
infrastructures, that hinders interoperability, sustainability, and
cross-verification of formal proofs.  After three decades dedicated to
the development of these systems, the logical next step is their
integration. To achieve this goal, we aim at building an open, on line
encyclopedia of formal proofs called Logipedia.

The time is indeed ripe to enhance the European strategy and co-build
such a research infrastructure across Europe: after three decades of
research, we now have empirical evidence that most of the formal
proofs developed in one of these systems can also be developed in
another. We understand the relationship between the theories
implemented in these systems much better. We also have logical
frameworks to express the theories implemented in these systems and
algorithms to translate proofs from one theory to another.

Such a project requires to gather a large community, hence our
consortium of twenty-eight partners,from eleven European countries,
where most European centers of excellence in formal proofs are
represented.

